---
title: What I use, 2023 edition
tags:
  - Uses
redirect_from:
  - /uses
---

Hi, I'm Louis! Creator of [the Gleam programming languge](https://gleam.run)
and software tinker.

I'm a sucker for nostalgia, and I enjoy talking and thinking about technology,
so I've decided to join the `/uses` train and write about what tech I use and
why. Let's go!

## My workstation

I use a 2020 Macbook Air with 16GB RAM, the hostname for which is Diglett. I
name all my devices after Pokemon as I'm very mature and enjoy occasionally
forgetting exactly which one is Bellsprout and which is one Chansey.

I'm rather indifferent to macOS and in may ways prefer Linux, but they're
reliable machines and I was quite excited to use an ARM processor. I think my
ideal would be an ARM Linux laptop that's design to be repairable and
upgradable, but as I've got this I'm going to try and make it last as long as
possible, to avoid creating electrical waste.

For years I've struggled with RSI. I'm largely OK these days, but it means I
have to be mindful of how I use computers. I almost never use my laptop as a
laptop, instead using it as a desktop computer. Perhaps an Apple mini desktop
would have been better, but it's nice to have a computer I can take with on the
infrequent occasions I travel and might want to do some work.

My monitor is some cheap 1440p ultrawide AOC thing that a friend gave to me.
I'm not in love with it, but I can't afford a lovely 5k replacement, so it'll
do for now. My mouse is a Razer brand bluetooth mouse which works well enough
for me.

My keyboard! I got into mechanical keyboards in part because of my RSI, but it
has become something I really enjoy. I use an ortholinear 40% [Planck v7][planck]
with a gorgeous green aluminium case and green [Acute keycaps][keycaps]. I use
Cherry MX Silent Red switches, which are linear and the quietest switches I've
ever heard. They feel fab to me, and they're much less antisocial than other
switches I've used.

[planck]: https://drop.com/buy/planck-mechanical-keyboard?defaultSelectionIds=976713
[keycaps]: https://drop.com/buy/massdrop-x-olkb-acute-ortholinear-keycap-set

![A tiny ortholinear mechanical keyboard of 4 rows and 12 columns](/img/planck.webp)

I'd really like to experiment with low profile split bluetooth keyboards like
the [GEIST TOTEM][totem]. You could do all sorts of intereting things with them
like attach them to your thighs or mount them vertically on a desk, two
positions which seem to fit the human body much more naturally than the
standard horizontal keyboard position. It's a lot of money for an experiment
though, so it'll have to wait.

[totem]: https://github.com/GEIGEIGEIST/TOTEM#photos

Every desk chair ever seems to give me back ache, including the expensive ones
everyone recommends. These days I'm using the rather bizarre looking Varier
Variable Balans kneeling chair, which I bought second hand as an experiment.
Most the time I kneel on it not the way it's intended, but it's working much
better for me than a regular chair. I think part of that is that I move around
on it so much and rotate through a bunch of different positions while using it.

![A rocking kneeling stool in all black](/img/varier-variable-balans.png)

The majority of the time I don't sit on anything at all, thanks to my [IKEA
hand-cranked standing desk][desk]. This is maybe one the best things I've bought when
it comes to my health, I'd recommend it to everyone, especially with how cheap
the hand-cranked one is. Standing and moving around has made such a difference
for me.

[desk]: https://www.ikea.com/gb/en/p/trotten-desk-sit-stand-white-s99429578/

On my desk I've got a pair of comically named [Sony WH-1000XM3][headphones]
headphones. I bought them years back for when I worked in a noisy office, but
they still get use for playing rave music letting me rapidly alternate between
programming and dancing around the room like a nutter. Perhaps controversially,
I don't think they sound very good, and something without isolation (or with a
pass-through feature) would be much better for me. ANC can be tiring on the
ears, and I've missed the doorbell on a few occasions.

[headphones]: https://www.sony.co.uk/electronics/headband-headphones/wh-1000xm3

## Software

I've been a Linux terminal person for longer than I've been a programmer, but
in recent years I've been using Visual Studio Code, after being impressed with
how easy it was to get going with. However, a week ago I tried my old love
[Neovim][nvim] again after having not used it since before Lua support landed.
Wow, the configuration and out-of-the-box experience is really good these days!
I've been using the [LazyVim][lazyvim] starter template and I think Neovim is
going to become my daily driver once again.

[nvim]: https://neovim.io/
[lazyvim]: https://www.lazyvim.org/

Some other software I use on my workstation:

- [Firefox](https://www.mozilla.org/en-GB/firefox/), a browser.
- [Fish](https://fishshell.com/), a shell with excellent UX.
- [Migadu](https://www.migadu.com/) and the Apple Mail app, for email.
- [mpd](https://github.com/MusicPlayerDaemon/MPD/) with [mpc](https://github.com/MusicPlayerDaemon/mpc) and [Persephone](https://github.com/danbee/persephone), a hacker's music player.
- [watchexec](https://github.com/watchexec/watchexec), for running commands when files change.
- [xh](https://github.com/ducaale/xh), an ergonomic terminal HTTP client.
- [yt-dlp](https://github.com/yt-dlp/yt-dlp), a video downloader.
- [moreutils](https://joeyh.name/code/moreutils/), some niche but useful scripts.
- [zoxide](https://github.com/ajeetdsouza/zoxide), a fast directory jumper.
- [asdf](https://asdf-vm.com/), a software version manager and installer.
- [ripgrep](https://github.com/BurntSushi/ripgrep), grep but a little easier to use.

## Personal devices

Over the last few years I seem to have accumulated a lot of Apple stuff. I'm a
little worried about how annoying it'll be to move away from them, but that
seems to be an unavoidable problem with any brand these days.

My phone is an iPhone Pro 13 Pro (named Machop), which I bought refurbished
this year to replace a very broken Android phone. I quite like a lot about the
iOS experience and lots of the built-in features and apps are very clever. It
has made me much more interested in phones as a programming platform. This is
immensely frustrating as the yearly fee you have to pay Apple to run your own
software on the computer _you bought from them_ is straight up robbery and should
be illegal as far as I'm concerned. I'm very jealous of how Android users can
run a full Linux development environment on their phones. A phone and a
bluetooth keyboard would be an amazing portable setup and I could forget about
laptops entirely!

I have an iPad Air 4 (named Hoothoot) which I mostly use for watching videos
when cooking or in bed, and this year I splashed out on the cheapest Apple
watch (named Kabuto) when I found one heavily discounted. It's a too
underpowered for most apps to be usable, but I've found the "rings" that nag
you to exercise surprisingly motivating. It even got me to buy an Apple
Fitness+ subscription, which I do make use of. Well done to the Apple marketing
team I suppose!

## Homelab

Now here's some computing which brings me a lot joy! Since going full time on
Gleam (rather than working 2 jobs at once as I have for many years) I've had
time for engaging with technology as a hobby again. One thing I've been doing
is winding down my use of proprietary services and instead running my own
software. It has been tremendously enjoyable.

I may be slightly misusing the term "homelab" as my philosophy is quite
different to what I see on homelab social media, but I'm not sure what else to
call it. I really like trying to do as much as possible with as little as
possible so big powerful computers running lots of docker containers of
resource hungry programs isn't very appealing to me. Inefficient software
causes more polution, and it's so much more fun to solve a problem when
you have constraints! So many of these systems are designed for large
enterprises, but I'm not a large enterprise, I'm some guy with a bad moustache.

I've a 4GB Raspberry Pi 4 (named Cubone) which is my server. It boots from an
SSD connected via a USB cable, which is a bit silly but the novelty PlayStation
case I found was so cute I completely abandoned any logical thinking and bought
it immediately. It doesn't have a place for an SSD inside.

![A Raspberry Pi case that looks like an original PlayStation](/img/pistation.png)

I've used configuration management tools like Ansible and Chef a lot in the
past, but I don't enjoy using any of them. The idea behind them is great, but
they're all so slow and overly complex. For my personal stuff I just write
[some POSIX shell scripts][install] which I `scp` to the server and run.

[install]: https://github.com/lpil/lpil/tree/7041104aa36ed5178007ef85f6d4617f5f144e9a/home/server

If you're a comfortable programmer and have experience with Ansible or similar
then I think using shell scripts will be easier to work with, and can can run
in a couple seconds rather than possibly minutes. Give it a try!

### VPN and backups

The server isn't publicly accessible, so I use [Tailscale][ts] to create a VPN
for my devices. Tailscale rules. I love it. It makes a lot of boring stuff
really easy.

[ts]: https://tailscale.com/

Backing up and replicating data is really important! There's few things I would
be more upset about losing than family photos. I use [Syncthing][syncthing] to
replicate my personal data beteen the server and my laptop, and
[rclone][rclone] to back it up to Backblaze B2 and my dad's home server. I
think I'd like to replace B2 and get an offline backup next year. I'm also
curious about btrfs.

### Media

The server has SFTP enabled and my phone pushes photos and videos to it over
that. I'm using the app FTPManager, but it'll probably get replaced as it
doesn't seem to support not pushing photos that have already been uploaded,
even if they are no longer in the SFTP receive directory.

[syncthing]: https://syncthing.net/
[rclone]: https://rclone.org/

For a while I ran Plex, but it sucked! It used monstrous amounts of resources
and was constantly nagging to give them money. I replaced it by enabling NTFS
on the server and using the Android VLC app to stream videos from it on my TV.
It uses pretty much no resources, and the only downside so far is that I have
to navigate the file system rather than having some fancy UI. That's fine, it's
my file system. I know where I put the video I want to watch.

### Web

I slightly lied when I said the server isn't publicly accessible. I'm using
[Cloudflare Tunnel][cft] to <strike>man in the middle attack myself</strike>
proxy HTTP traffic from the public internet to the server. It gets received by
[Caddy][caddy], a fantastic web proxy that finally ended my many year
relationship with Nginx.

[cft]: https://www.cloudflare.com/en-gb/products/tunnel/
[caddy]: https://caddyserver.com/

I've got Caddy serving two directories of files, one public, one with HTTP
basic authentication, as well as a couple static sites. I've also added a
[CGI][cgi] module to Caddy and use it to run some scripts, presumably because
I'm completely mad.

[cgi]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_Gateway_Interface

OK! Hear me out! CGI is good, actually!

It may be kinda slow and awkward, but CGI scripts only uses system resources
when they are actually handling a request. There's so many sites on the
internet that serve practically no traffic, and so much energy and compute
could be saved by not running those programs all the time, taking up space
doing nothing. If we called it _POSIX serverless_ or something I bet we could
get some VC funding for it.

### Monitoring

I have a handful of sites that I want to know about any outages for, and for
this I use [gatus][gatus]. It's a simple little program that will take a yaml
file of URLs and periodically send them HTTP requests, and then sending you a
notification if they fail however many times in a row.

[gatus]: https://github.com/TwiN/gatus/

It's written in Go. I tend to opt for software written in Go as there's a lot
of it, it's typically a single statically linked binary, and often these
programs use relatively small amounts of resources. It's not always the case,
but Gatus ticks those boxes.

For notifications I use [Pushover][pushover], which a service that lets you
send a HTTP request to them and they'll send a push notification to your phone.
That's it. Super straightforward. What's even cooler is that it's a single $5
purchase for the app, and then you can use it forever. I hope the developer is
making enough money because it seems like a really generous deal to me.

[pushover]: https://pushover.net/

The last bit of software I run is [Goatcounter][goatcounter], a basic analytics
service, again written in Go. Ideally I'd just parse access logs to get visitor
numbers, but some of these sites are hosted on GitHub pages so I don't have
access to that data.

[goatcounter]: https://github.com/arp242/goatcounter

It's an OK bit of software. The UI is nice, but by default it tracks more than
I want (I don't use their default JavaScript for this reason), and it has this
really silly thing where you need to use a new DNS name for each site you want
to track. I'm not going to duplicate a DNS record once per site, it's not
practical. I'm hacking around the problem by prepending the hostname to the
path when registering events. It works, if unsatisfyingly.

All the alternatives seem to be more invasive or use more resources, so I'm
sticking with it for now. Let me know if you have an alternative to suggest.

### Networking

Confession time: I don't understand my home network well enough to explain it.
When I moved into this flat I mentioned what I was aiming for and he turned up
later with a bunch of stuff and installed it while giving me one of those
"engineer with decades of experience in this field" explanations that's just a
bit too much to absorb in one go. He's also more of a
configure-things-with-interactive-tools than an configure-with-code kinda guy,
so there's a bit of a mismatch there too.

He knows his stuff and it's been rock solid so I've largely ignored it,
depriving myself of any opportunity to learn. Don't worry, it's there on my
never-ending todo list. Somewhere...

### The Future

I add to this little project every now and again as the mood takes me. Other
than the additions mentioned above I'd like to try a minimalistic approach to
[Prometheus][prom]. It seems promising, didn't use too much memory in my brief
test, and it has Pushover support. Perhaps it could replace Gatus too.

[prom]: https://prometheus.io/

[PhotoPrism][photoprism] looks like very nice photo library software. I'm
hoping [Grist][grist] could break my Google Sheets dependence. I use Apple
notes for Journaling and some basic data collection, I'd like to export that
data and keep my own copy somehow. DNS that blocks adverts like [AdGuard
Home][adguard] could be good for my phone's battery life and surfing
experience.

[photoprism]: https://github.com/photoprism/photoprism
[grist]: https://github.com/gristlabs/grist-core
[adguard]: https://github.com/AdguardTeam/AdGuardHome

So yes, lots more fun to be had with this tiny little computer. :)

Happy new year folks. I hope you had a good 2023, and hope this next one is
even better. x
